# Source of Book Files

**\*\*\*In 2011 we obtained a CD image dated 1997 that was the companion
disk for Michael Abrash's****Graphics Programming Black Book with
numerous files on it including one containing the following message.**

**Note, the Black Book is available for download in PDF at this
URL**[http://www.gamedev.net/page/resources/\_/technical/graphics-programming-and-theory/graphics-programming-black-book-r1698](http://www.gamedev.net/page/resources/_/technical/graphics-programming-and-theory/graphics-programming-black-book-r1698)****

**In HTML at
[http://www.jagregory.com/abrash-black-book/](http://www.jagregory.com/abrash-black-book/)**

**For download in epub and mobi formats at
[https://github.com/jagregory/abrash-black-book/releases](https://github.com/jagregory/abrash-black-book/releases)**

In 1989, Michael Abrash completed \*the\* classic work on 8088-oriented
code optimization. ZEN OF ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE was published by Scott,
Foresman & Company as part of a series of assembly books edited by Jeff
Duntemann. Unfortunately, not long after the book was published, Scott,
Foresman was acquired by Harper Collins, and the larger firm chose not
to continue the Scott, Foresman computer trade line. 200 books perished
in the acquisition, and while the world was better off without most of
them, ZEN OF ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE vanished as well.

In the intervening years, since quantities of the book in stores were
exhausted, many people have asked for reprints of ZEN OF ASSEMBLY
LANGUAGE. The economies of publishing do not allow it to be reprinted in
its original form, but Michael has arranged to make the book available
as a set of word processor files on the CD-ROM for the second edition of
ZEN OF GRAPHICS PROGRAMMING.

There was insufficient time to include scanned bitmaps of the many
figures in ZEN OF ASSEMBLY LANGUAGE on this first pressing of the
CD-ROM, but the figures will be available on the Coriolis Web Site:
[http://www.coriolis.com](http://www.coriolis.com), under book diskette
files. Alternately, you can locate the files through ftp from directory
[ftp://coriolis.com/pub/bookdisk/](ftp://coriolis.com/pub/bookdisk/) in
several files in the form ZOAFIG??.ZIP, where ?? will be a two-digit
number representing the chapter from which the figures were taken. If a
chapter is not represented it means that that chapter contained no
figures.

Future pressings of the CD-ROM will contain all of the figure bitmap
files as well as the text.

**\*\*\*The web sites at the above URLs do not function now but there
were some .tif versions on the CD. The figures were poor quality
scans****so we redrew them****for this version. A few figures were
missing so we recreated them.**

The text files are in two formats on the CD-ROM. One, in the WP42
subdirectory of ZOA, is the Word Perfect 4.2 format, which is still
readily importable to many major word processors. The other is RTF, in
the RTF subdirectory of ZOA, which is the Rich Text Format, which is
easily importable by Microsoft Word and most newer word processors.

All of the chapters are present except for Chapter 6, which has become
lost. Chapter 6 simply contains an overview of the 8088 processor, which
can be had in other older books on PC assembly language. Michael did not
get into any of his trademark Zen insights in Chapter 6. It was
presented strictly as foundation knowledge.

The code listings for the book are contained in a self-extracting
archive file ZEN\_LIST.EXE. Copy this file to a subdirectory and execute
it. The listing files will be extracted into the subdirectory.

**\*\*\*****This electronic version was created to provide an digital
version for reading on computers or portable book readers. This is a
restoration of the book issued on CD containing the original copyrighted
content, offered here in this format with the permission of Michael
Abrash the author.**

**\*\*\*We transferred the RTF files to MS Word 2007, reformatted some
parts, put some information in tables, created hyperlinks and bookmarks,
inserted the figures and generated a PDF.**

**\*\*\*Appendix B and Chapter 6 were missing from the CD, so we
recreated them.**

**\*\*\*The original book had the program listings embedded in the text.
The RTF files on the CD did not include the listings text, so a section
was added containing the listings and hyperlinked to references in the
Chapter text. Click on the listing title in the text to go to the
listing. Click on the listing title to return to the first mention of
the listing in the text.**

**\*\*\*We added some color in the figures and used a colored font for
all code in the book (the original book was printed in black and white).
We own a print copy of the book, so we were able to create a cover image
and use OCR to help recreate Chapter 6.**

**\*\*\*The ZEN\_LIST.EXE on the CD contained the programs but doesn’t
auto extract on modern Windows operating systems. We were able to
extract the files with WINRAR. The Listings for Chapter 15 were missing,
so we recreated them from the book.**

**\*\*\*The table of contents hyperlinks will take you to the listed
title. Clicking on the title will take you back to the table of contents
page.**

**\*\*\*We doubt that there are many 8088 machines left running but
there might be some simulators out there that will run the code— so this
21+ year old book, and the efforts made to create this electronic
version might be considered a waste of time. Having written assembly
code during the era of this book and being inspired by it, were reasons
enough to exert the effort. It is unfortunate that Michael was unable to
produce the other planned volume; it might have proved to be one of the
fundamental sources of assembly language programming techniques.**

**Through the efforts of James Gregory (who has published
the****Graphics Programming Black Book in epub and mobi formats)****this
document may soon be available on the internet in the most common book
reader formats.**

**Ron Welch**

